4 - Exercise 4 with itk-snap (#5)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course: episodes/itksnap.Rmd

---

> title: 'itksnap'

Reviewer: That is fair. How about "A Practical Introduction to working with Medical Image Data" or "A Practical Walkthrough of Working with Medical Image Data?"

> title: 'itksnap'

Reviewer 2: yes, i like those titles (either of them)

> title: 'itksnap'

Author: [7fd7903](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/7fd79031e6101fe24819f227a5dfa259216fb737)

teaching: 10
exercises: 2
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

> - How to understand and visualise volumetric medical data in ITK-SNAP?

Reviewer: I agree with @jamie-mcclelland

> - How to understand and visualise volumetric medical data in ITK-SNAP?

Author: [19db742](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/19db74210bc8916650afeffc4ba53d40171d9794)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Medical imaging data in DICOM and nifti formats
- Getting started with ITK-SNAP
- Viewing data
- Converting data

> - Modifyiing data

Author: [19db742](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/19db74210bc8916650afeffc4ba53d40171d9794)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Medical Imaging Data 
In these exercises we will be working with real-world medical imaging data from the Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA).

> 

Author: [b4e03b9](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/b4e03b98a39b6ad4d0ca6541f144c75673fcb24c)

### Data resources

> #### CT-vs-PET-Ventilation-Imaging 

Author: [825d98f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/825d98fbcc94094cf310aebf35a77d13fd59b791)

CT Ventilation as a Functional Imaging Modality for Lung Cancer Radiotherapy from [TCIA](https://www.cancerimagingarchive.net/collection/ct-vs-pet-ventilation-imaging/).
We recomend to focus on exhale/inhale breath hold CT (BHCT) Dicoms which belog to: 
* The BHCT scans for CT-PET-VI-02 & CT-PET-VI-03 show very little motion between inhale and exhale
* The BHCT scans for CT-PET-VI-05 have a different number of slices between the inhale and exhale

Data paths look like these:
```

> /CT-PET-VI-02$ tree -d 

Reviewer 3: I get 
> Command 'tree' not found
on linux.
Need to check dependencies for all OS

Author: [74e2376](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/74e2376b1141f9ce40a3f8dd34782bfc1d11fe7e)

.
├── 1000.000000-PET SUV Factors-26496 [1 item, with size 42.1 kB]
├── 3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-61322  [175 items, totalling 92.4 MB]
├── 4.000000-Galligas Lung-03537 [159 items, totalling 51.5 MB]
├── 5.000000-Thorax Insp  2.0  B70f-29873 [167 items, totalling 88.1 MB]
├── 7.000000-Thorax Exp  2.0  B70f-73355 [167 items, totalling 88.1 MB]
└── 8.000000-RespLow  2.0  B30s  80  Ex - 100  In-44317 [810 items, totalling 426.9 MB]

/CT-PET-VI-03$ tree -d
.
├── 06-25-1996-RTRTRespLowBreathRateRNS Adult-43080
│   ├── 1000.000000-PET SUV Factors-06580
│   ├── 3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-08354
│   └── 4.000000-Galligas Lung-15379
└── 06-25-1996-RTRTRespLowBreathRateRNS Adult-87093
    ├── 5.000000-Thorax Insp  2.0  B70f-42000
    ├── 7.000000-Thorax Exp  2.0  B70f-45310
    └── 8.000000-RespLow  2.0  B30s  80  Ex - 100  In-54790

/CT-PET-VI-05$ tree -d
└── 12-10-1996-RTRTRespLowBreathRateRNS Adult-37585
    ├── 1000.000000-PET SUV Factors-63910
    ├── 3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-90638
    ├── 4.000000-Galligas Lung-26361
    ├── 5.000000-Thorax Insp  2.0  B70f-45546
    ├── 7.000000-Thorax Exp  2.0  B70f-31579
    └── 8.000000-RespLow  2.0  B30s  80  Ex - 100  In-16454
```

> #### the HNSCC collection on The Cancer Imaging Archive

Author: [19db742](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/19db74210bc8916650afeffc4ba53d40171d9794)

> #### the HNSCC collection on The Cancer Imaging Archive

Author: [3c5892f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/3c5892f64bfa16f7de28f39140722f1a553e888b)

facial details blurred) prior to sharing them with you for these exercises to help ensure the
individuals cannot be reidentified. 

#### The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA)
The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) is a resource of public datasets hosts a large archive of medical images of cancer accessible for public download. 
Data may require extensive cleaning and pre-processing before it is suitable to be used.

#### Notes 
1. When using open datasets that contain images of humans, such as those from TCIA, for your
own research, you will still need to get ethical approval (as you do for any non-open
datasets you use) – this can usually be obtained from the local ethics committee (both
Medical Physics and Computer Science have their own local ethics committee) or from UCL
central ethics if your department does not have one.
2. Although there are many formats that medical imaging data can come
in, we are going to focus on DICOM and nifti as they are two of the most common formats.
Most data that comes from a hospital will be in DICOM format, whereas nifti is a very
popular format in the medical image analysis community.

### DICOM format

> DICOM images typically have a separate file for every slice. 

Reviewer: I think that is the way to go. More scanners are putting this out, but the software to handle it lags behind.

> DICOM images typically have a separate file for every slice. 

Author: [12eca46](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/12eca469905eca799fb2073fd2ea48657030bcd9)

If you look at the data `3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-61322` you will see there are 175 individual files corresponding to 175 slices in the volume. 
In addition to the image data for each slice, each file contains a header which can contain an extensive amount of extra information relating to the scan and subject. 

In a clinical setting this will include patient identifiable information such as their name, address, and other relevant details. 
Such information should be removed before the data is transferred from the clinical network for use in research. 
If you ever discover patient identifiable information in the header of data you are using you should immediately alert your supervisor, manager or collaborator

The majority of the information in the DICOM header is not directly useful for typical image processing and analysis tasks. 

> Furthermore, there are complicated ‘links’ (provided by unique identifiers, UIDs) between the DICOM headers of different files belonging to thesame scan or subject, which together with storing separate slices as separate files, makes working directly with DICOM rather cumbersome (at least if you want to do it correctly!).

Reviewer: Sorry completely missed that! You are right.

Therefore, a common first step of any image processing pipeline is to convert the DICOM image to a more suitable format such as `NifTi`. 
Generally, you will only convert images back to DICOM if you need to import them into a clinical system that only works with DICOM.

Notes.
1. Converting images back to DICOM such that they are correctly interpreted by a clinical system can be very tricky and requires a good understanding of the DICOM standard. 
More information on the DICOM standard can be found here: https://www.dicomstandard.org

### NifTi format

> The Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) image format are usually stored as a single file containing the imaging data and header information.

Reviewer: Sure sounds good

> The Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) image format are usually stored as a single file containing the imaging data and header information.

Author: [c61c24b](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/c61c24b15340204ac4f3aa1e322e4ecea8d1f4fc)

It also is possible to store the header and image data in separate files but this is not very common.

There are actually two formats for nifti files, nifti-1 and nifti-2, with the later allowing for very large images. 
However, the formats are very similar, and the header contains the same info (but some of it stored slightly differently). 

> They can be worked with and manipulated in the same way, and it is only when loading and saving the files (which is handled by NiBabel’s functions) that a distinction really needs to be made. 

Author: [e8ecdbb](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/e8ecdbb5d819fe2192aa03af79677468160f56ad)

The nifti header contains much less information than DICOM, but does include all the key information required for interpreting, manipulating, and processing the image. 

> During these exercises you will learn about some of the key information stored in the nifti header, but for more information see: https://brainder.org/2012/09/23/the-nifti-file-format/ and https://brainder.org/2015/04/03/the-nifti-2-file-format/.

Author: 76c5992

> ## ITK-SNAP

Author: e0bdca0

> ### Getting Started with ITK-SNAP

Author: [c611543](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/c61154330ddb7845133010a5de747513d563d057)

* Memory: "Overall 2Gb of memory should be enough for most users; 4Gb should suffice for users with large images." [:link:](http://www.itksnap.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php?n=Documentation.HardwareRequirements#:~:text=Memory%20usage%20in%20SNAP%20is,for%20a%20512%20cubed%20image.)
* Multi - Operating System: 
	* ITK-SNAP binaries are distributed for Linux (32 and 64 bit)), 
	* Windows (64 bit), 
	* and MacOS Leopard (64 bit).

#### Installation
##### Windows 11
- Open the following link: https://sourceforge.net/projects/itk-snap/files/itk-snap/4.2.0/
- Download `itksnap-4.2.0-20240422-win64-AMD64.exe` 
- Install it by following default settings.

##### Ubuntu 22.04 x64 GNU/Linux
```
FILENAME=itksnap-nightly-rel_4.0-Linux-gcc64.tar.gz  #Length: 200943059 (192M) [application/x-gzip]
cd ~/Downloads/
mkdir -p itksnap && cd itksnap
wget https://sourceforge.net/projects/itk-snap/files/itk-snap/Nightly/$FILENAME/download -O $FILENAME
tar -xvzf $FILENAME
```

### ITK-SNAP application
ITK-SNAP application shows three orthogonal slices and a fourth window for three-dimensional view segmentation. 
![ITK-SNAP main window](../fig/itk-snap-main-window.svg)

## Viewing and understanding DICOM data

> We are using DICOM data from "3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-61322  [175 items, totalling 92.4 MB]".

Author: Added details here 674af5f and 
ebdef26. Let's use CT Lung DICOM dataset from `CT-PET-VI-02`: "3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-61322  [175 items, totalling 92.4 MB]" as it is an overkill taking screenshots and adding details on a different datasets. 
I would then suggest to create an exercise following our instructions with different datasets

### Opening and Viewing DICOM images

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 3
we need to explain how to navigate around the image, i.e. change the displayed slices
explain this can be done by left clicking in the displayed slices, using the mouse wheel, or the slider next to the displayed slices
explain how you can zoom using the right mouse button (or control + button 1), and pan using the centre mouse button (or alt +  button 1)
(there may be other ways of doing the above as well - I have not used itksnap before so am still very much figuring it out myself!)
also need to explain that the cursor position (in voxels) and intensity value at the cursor are shown on the left in the Cursor Inspector
![image](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/assets/9380572/432ccceb-1668-4c5a-85bb-1a583b538269)

when i wrote the comment above (now a few hours ago!) i was going to show how to adjust the intensity window here, but now I think that should be saved for when doing the colour overlay below

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 4
images can also be opened by simply dragging them on to the itksnap window
in a file explorer (Finder in Mac) go to the exhale_BH_CT folder and drag any of the dicom files on to the itksnap window. A small window will pop up asking What should itksnap do with this image? If you select Load as Main Image it will replace the current image. Instead select Load as Additional Image - this will enable easy comparison of the two images.

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 5 and 6
once the second image is loaded you will see two thumbnails in the top corner of each slice display
![image](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/assets/9380572/b7a18f78-19f5-4d21-8d48-02ae0348da00)
click on these to swap the displayed slices from one image to the other - this will enable you to easily see the similarities and differences between the images
you will also see that both images now appear in the Cursor Inspector, where you can see the intensity value at the cursor for both images. you can also change the displayed image by clicking on it in the Cursor Inspector

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 7
In some cases you may want to display an image as a colour overlay on top of another image, e.g. displaying a PET image overlaid on the corresponding CT.
Load the CT_for_PET image either using the drag and drop method or File->Open Image as described above
This time select Load as Main Image. This will load in the new image replacing the two that were previously loaded.

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 8
To load the PET image as a colour overlay you need to use File->Add Another Image...
Click on Browse and select any one of the files in the PET folder. Make sure File Format is DICOM Image Series (it should be). Click Next and then Next again. When the image has loaded select As a semi-transparent overlay. you can also set the overlay color map here - select Hot from the dropdown menu and click Next. The image summary will then be displayed, along with a warning about possible loss of precision (which can be ignored). click Finish

> * Open DICOM images  

Reviewer 2: step 9 and 10
PET image appears in Cursor Inspector (called Galligas Lung) in italic. Right clicking on it opens a Menu that enables you to set the color map and change the opacity using a slider (amongst other things). 
Go to Tools->Layer Inspector. This opens the Image Layer Inspector window. you will see the two images on the left, and five tabs along the top of the window.
The General tab displays the filename and the nickname for the selected image. The Nickname can be edited. For the PET image the general tab also displays a slider to set the opacity, and the option to display it as a separate image or semi-transparent overlay
the Contrast tab enables you to adjust how the image intensities are displayed for the different images. e.g. select the lung image and set the maximum value to 1000 (push enter after typing the number) and this will make the structures in the lung easier to see.
The color map tab can be used to select and manipulate the colour map
The info tab displays the Image Header information for the images and also gives the Cursor Coordinates in both Voxel and World units. if you look at the info tab for both the CT image and PET image you will see that the header information for the images is different, and the cursor coordinates in voxel units for the PET image are not whole numbers - this is because the displayed slices are from the main (CT) image, and the overlaid (PET) image slices are interpolated at the corresponding locations.
finally the metadata tab contains (some of) the information from the DICOM header of the images

> * Open DICOM images  

Author: FYI.  _... majority of jamie-mcclelland comments adding sections, figures and vector files with the combination of zsenousy instructions to avoid replication, also fixes datasets files_ [491c44d](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/491c44d4eb7dad7e9e4e219e5a9d673f04ebe182)

> Open ITK-SNAP application and the directory where you see "3.000000-CT Lung  3.0  B31f-61322" where you see `1-*.dcm` files, drag directory and drop it into ITK application,  select File format to `DICOM Image Series`, and clid `Next` and `Finish`

Author: 0f756e5

> ![ITK-SNAP main window](../fig/itk-snap-viewing-dicoms.svg)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

### Navigating DICOM images

Here, we provide instructions for handling multiple DICOM images, applying overlays, viewing image information, and using color maps in ITK-SNAP.

#### 1. Loading Multiple DICOM Images as Separate Images

1. **Open the First DICOM Series**:
   - Follow the steps above to load and view the first DICOM series.

2. **Open the Second DICOM image in a New Window**:
   - Go to `File` > `New itksnap Window`.

>    - Select `Open DICOM Series` and choose the second DICOM series.

Author: No need to add any series! 
This is just the option you have in the menu.

   - This will open the second series in a separate ITK-SNAP window.
   - This can be repeated for multiple DICOM series.

> ![ITK-SNAP new window](../fig/new-itk-snap-window.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

#### 2. Applying Overlays

> 

Author: [f9ddfee](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/f9ddfee633285b4b8ccb3d07915f80ed054f9d1a)

1. **Load Primary Image**:
   - Open your primary DICOM series as described above.

2. **Load Overlay Image**:
   - Go to `File` > `Add Another Image`.
   - Select the image you want to use as an overlay. This could be another DICOM series or a previously saved segmentation.

> ![ITK-SNAP additional image](../fig/open-additional-image.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

> ![ITK-SNAP overlay](../fig/overlay-wizard.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

3. **Adjust Overlay Settings**:
   - Go to the `Layers` panel.
   - Right click on the second DICOM Series and adjust the opacity and blending settings to properly visualise the overlay on the primary image.

> ![ITK-SNAP layers panel](../fig/layers-panel.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

#### 4. Viewing Image Information

> 

Author: [f9ddfee](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/f9ddfee633285b4b8ccb3d07915f80ed054f9d1a)

1. **Access Image Information**:
   - Go to `Tools` > `Image Information`.
   - A dialog box will appear displaying metadata and other relevant information about the loaded DICOM images.

> ![ITK-SNAP additional image](../fig/image-info.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

#### 5. Applying Color Maps

> 

Author: [1c3a69f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/1c3a69ff7e14d30f14d06e51d77898d04b3cfaac)

1. **Load the Image**:
   - Open the desired DICOM series.

2. **Open Color Map Settings**:
   - Go to `Tools` > `Color Maps Editor`.

3. **Apply and Adjust Color Map**:

>    - Choose a predefined color map from the list or create a custom one.

Author: [1c3a69f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/1c3a69ff7e14d30f14d06e51d77898d04b3cfaac)

   - Adjust the intensity and transparency settings as needed to enhance the visualisation of the images.

> ![ITK-SNAP additional image](../fig/colour-map-editor.png)

Author: [ae9eacd](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/ae9eacd3895774dc9b5ed600d27a7ad908221d3f)

### Converting DICOM images to NifTi

> 

Author: [1c3a69f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/1c3a69ff7e14d30f14d06e51d77898d04b3cfaac)

#### Using ITK-SNAP

> Navigate the ITK-snap by clicking 'File' --> 'Save image' --> rename image and choose format as 'NiFTI'.

Author: [55dd74d](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/55dd74dc77a3fc05d165433051a8c5f186312374)

> #### Using [dicom2nifti](https://github.com/icometrix/dicom2nifti)

Author: dicom2nifti works for this task! However users might like to try other packages: https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/issues/10#issuecomment-2137550616

> ```

Author: [e1eb91b](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/e1eb91bb499a322a2e78fdebfaf735f745232e41)

from pathlib import Path 
import dicom2nifti 
dicoms = Path("~/3_000000-CT_Lung_30_B31f-61322")
dicom2nifti.convert_directory(dicoms, ".", compression=True, reorient=True)
```

> 

Author: Good suggestion but we have 30 to 40 python snippets that would overflow episode, so let's keep it as it is to avoid user making too many clicks to expand collapse callouts

## Viewing and understanding the NifTi header with NiBabel
We are going to use the python package [NiBabel](https://nipy.org/nibabel/) to work with `NifTI` images. 
We recommend to check [documentation](https://nipy.org/nibabel/#documentation) for further deatils on using nibabel library.

> ### Installing Dependencies

Author: [24a0d47](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/24a0d479f2d801b817afbd6a41a9727ab1cec359)

Installing python virtual environment with dependencies (e.g., nibabel, etc).
See further instructions [here](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/tree/main/_dependencies). 

* Using conda
```
conda create -n "mirVE" python=3.11 pip -c conda-forge
conda activate mirVE
cd ~/_dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
* Using python virtual environment
```
# Installing dependencies in Ubuntu 22.04
sudo apt-get install -y python3-pip
sudo apt-get install -y python3-venv
# Create path for venv
cd $HOME
mkdir mirVE
cd mirVE
# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv mirVE
source mirVE/bin/activate
cd ~/_dependencies
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Loading images

> 1. Activate `mirVE` environment and open a python terminal under `*/episodes` path to run:

Author: [8441146](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/8441146a668ea8187ed393b782c3ae935c9054ef)

> ```

Author: [e1eb91b](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/e1eb91bb499a322a2e78fdebfaf735f745232e41)

#conda activate mirVE
#python

import numpy as np
import nibabel as nib
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
nii3ct = nib.load("data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f.nii.gz")
```

2. `NifTI` file properties:

> ```

Author: [e1eb91b](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/e1eb91bb499a322a2e78fdebfaf735f745232e41)

print(type(nii3ct))

# <class 'nibabel.nifti1.Nifti1Image'>
print(nii3ct.get_data_dtype())

> #int16

Author: [7631a11](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/7631a11bd0eb97bfc2d11d37998a103b990b5efb)

nii3ct.shape
# (512, 512, 175)
nii3ct.affine
## dicom2nifti.convert_directory(dicoms, ".", compression=True, reorient=True) # nii.gz
#array([[  -0.9765625 ,   -0.        ,    0.        ,  249.51171875],
#       [  -0.        ,   -0.9765625 ,    0.        ,  466.01171875],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    2.        , -553.5       ],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    0.        ,    1.        ]])
## dicom2nifti.convert_directory(dicoms, ".", compression=True, reorient=False) # nii.gz
#array([[  -0.9765625 ,    0.        ,    0.        ,  249.51171875],
#       [  -0.        ,    0.9765625 ,    0.        ,  -33.01171875],
#       [   0.        ,   -0.        ,    2.        , -553.5       ],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    0.        ,    1.        ]])
```

### Header features 

> ```

Author: [e1eb91b](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/e1eb91bb499a322a2e78fdebfaf735f745232e41)

#qoffset_x       : 249.51172
#qoffset_y       : -33.01172
#qoffset_z       : -553.5
#srow_x          : [ -0.9765625   0.          0.        249.51172  ]
#srow_y          : [ -0.          0.9765625   0.        -33.01172  ]
#srow_z          : [   0.    -0.     2.  -553.5]
#intent_name     : b''
#magic           : b'n+1'
```

### qform   
```
print(nii3ct.get_qform())
## dicom2nifti.convert_directory(dicoms, ".", compression=True, reorient=True) # nii.gz
#[[  -0.9765625     0.            0.          249.51171875]
# [   0.            0.9765625     0.          -33.01171875]
# [   0.            0.            2.         -553.5       ]
# [   0.            0.            0.            1.        ]]
## dicom2nifti.convert_directory(dicoms, ".", compression=True, reorient=False) # nii.gz
#[[  -0.9765625     0.            0.          249.51171875]
# [   0.           -0.9765625     0.          466.01171875]
# [   0.            0.            2.         -553.5       ]
# [   0.            0.            0.            1.        ]]

```

### coordinate system  
The original DICOM images assume the world coordinate system is LPS (i.e. values increase when moving to the left, posterior, and superior).

> See [here](https://nipy.org/nibabel/dicom/dicom_orientation.html), if you obtained a similar affine transform from the DICOM headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See this helpful information on [DICOM orientations](https://nipy.org/nibabel/dicom/dicom_orientation.html), and determine if you obtained a similar affine transform from the DICOM headers.
```

Author: [1c3a69f](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/1c3a69ff7e14d30f14d06e51d77898d04b3cfaac)

The values in the first two rows corresponding to the x and y dimensions would be the negative of those in the nifti header.

### Obtaining image pixel data
```
pixel_data=nii3ct.get_fdata()

print(pixel_data.dtype, pixel_data.shape)
#float64 (512, 512, 175)

plt.imshow(pixel_data[:,:,140], cmap="gray"); plt.show()
#launch plot window
```

## Modifying `NifTi` images and headers with Nibabel

### Using float64 data type
* The image data for a Nifti1Image object can be accessed using the `get_fdata` function.

> Loading the data from disk and cast it to float64 type before returning the data as a numpy array.

Reviewer: Are you saying to cast it to float64 or the get_fdata does that automatically?

Author: Casting is explained here `* Use the `set_data_dtype` function to set the data type to float32. ` which is differnt that `get_fdata`, hope that make sense.

However, this does not change the type of the image stored on disk, which as we have seen is int16 for this image, and this could still lead to downstream errors or unexpected behaviour for any processing that works directly on the images stored on disk. 
Therefore, we are going to convert the image saved on disk to a floating point image. 
We are going to use 32 bit rather than 64 bit floating point, as this is usually sufficiently accurate. 
```
print(nii3ct.get_data_dtype())
#int16
nii3ct.set_data_dtype(np.float32)
print(nii3ct.get_data_dtype())
#float32
```

We are also going to set the qform to unknown as suggested above.
This also updates the corresponding fields in the header. 
Use the `set_qform` function to set the `qform` code. 
To just set the code and not modify the other `qform` values in the header, the first input should be None. 
It is not necessary to modify the other `qform` values as they should be ignored when the code is set to unknown.
```

nii3ct.set_qform(None, code = 'unknown')
print(nii3ct.header)
...
qform_code      : unknown
...

```

The floating point image can now be written to disk using the save function. 

> Note. We do not need to manually modify the type of the image data – setting the data type for the Nifti1Image object tells it which type to use when writing the image data to disk.

Reviewer: Use one of the callouts for this paragraph

Author: [f432030](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/f432030a3b401ebad4ed9d23ceb108b2c925a4f2)

```
nib.save(nii3ct, 'data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f_float32.nii.gz')
```

### 16-bit integers vs 32 bit floats

The file size of `3_ct_lung__30__b31f_float32.nii.gz` is larger than  `3_ct_lung__30__b31f.nii.gz` (60 MB, 46 MB, respectively) because of the conversion from 16 bit integers to 32 bit floats. 

> Both images are compressed, but the compression is more efficient for the floating point image as it is not double than the original.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both images are compressed, but the compression is more efficient for the floating point image: while a 32-bit floating point variable is twice the size of a 16-bit integer, the floating image is less than double the size of the original integer image.
```

* int16
```
nii3ct_int16 = nib.load("data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f.nii.gz")

print(nii3ct_int16.get_data_dtype())
#int16

print(nii3ct_int16.header)
#<class 'nibabel.nifti1.Nifti1Header'> object, endian='<'
#sizeof_hdr      : 348
#data_type       : b''
#db_name         : b''
#extents         : 0
#session_error   : 0
#regular         : b''
#dim_info        : 0
#dim             : [  3 512 512 175   1   1   1   1]
#intent_p1       : 0.0
#intent_p2       : 0.0
#intent_p3       : 0.0
#intent_code     : none
#datatype        : int16
#bitpix          : 16
#...
```
* float32
```
nii3ct_float32 = nib.load("data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f_float32.nii.gz")

print(nii3ct_float32.get_data_dtype())
#float32

print(nii3ct_float32.header)
#<class 'nibabel.nifti1.Nifti1Header'> object, endian='<'
#sizeof_hdr      : 348
#data_type       : b''
#db_name         : b''
#extents         : 0
#session_error   : 0
#regular         : b''
#dim_info        : 0
#dim             : [  3 512 512 175   1   1   1   1]
#intent_p1       : 0.0
#intent_p2       : 0.0
#intent_p3       : 0.0
#intent_code     : none
#datatype        : float32
#bitpix          : 32
#slice_start     : 0
#...
```

### Cropping data

> 

Reviewer: Images often contain a lot of background voxels. While this informaiton can be useful in some instances, it often just takes up valuable RAM memory, especially for large images.

Author: [70bb35c](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course/pull/5/commits/70bb35cd32e535f1b403138a7f5f8b251cdbe5c0)

#dim_info        : 0
#dim             : [  3 278 180 175   1   1   1   1]
#intent_p1       : 0.0
#intent_p2       : 0.0
#intent_p3       : 0.0
#intent_code     : none
#datatype        : float32
#bitpix          : 32
#slice_start     : 0
#pixdim          : [1.        0.9765625 0.9765625 2.        1.        1.        1.
# 1.       ]
#vox_offset      : 0.0
#scl_slope       : nan
#scl_inter       : nan
#slice_end       : 0
#slice_code      : unknown
#xyzt_units      : 2
#cal_max         : 0.0
#cal_min         : 0.0
#slice_duration  : 0.0
#toffset         : 0.0
#glmax           : 0
#glmin           : 0
#descrip         : b''
#aux_file        : b''
#qform_code      : unknown
#sform_code      : aligned
#quatern_b       : 0.0
#quatern_c       : 0.0
#quatern_d       : 1.0
#qoffset_x       : 249.51172
#qoffset_y       : 466.01172
#qoffset_z       : -553.5
#srow_x          : [ -0.9765625  -0.          0.        249.51172  ]
#srow_y          : [ -0.         -0.9765625   0.        466.01172  ]
#srow_z          : [   0.     0.     2.  -553.5]
#intent_name     : b''
#magic           : b'n+1'

nib.save(nii3ct_float32_cropped, "data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f_float32_cropped.nii.gz")
```

> * Settgin world coordinates of voxel (103, 160, 0) in the uncropped image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Setting world coordinates of voxel (103, 160, 0) in the uncropped image.
```

# [  -0.           -0.9765625     0.          309.76171875]
# [   0.            0.            2.         -553.5       ]
# [   0.            0.            0.            1.        ]]

nii3ct_float32_cropped.set_sform(aff_mat_cropped)
nii3ct_float32_cropped.affine
#array([[  -0.9765625 ,   -0.        ,    0.        ,  148.92578125],
#       [  -0.        ,   -0.9765625 ,    0.        ,  309.76171875],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    2.        , -553.5       ],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    0.        ,    1.        ]])

nib.save(nii3ct_float32_cropped, "data/3_ct_lung__30__b31f_float32_cropped_affine.nii.gz")
```
* updating the affine transforms with `nibabel.slicer`
```
nii3ct_float32_cropped_with_nibabel_slicer = nii3ct_float32.slicer[103:381,160:340,:]
nii3ct_float32_cropped_with_nibabel_slicer.affine
#array([[  -0.9765625 ,    0.        ,    0.        ,  148.92578125],
#       [   0.        ,   -0.9765625 ,    0.        ,  309.76171875],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    2.        , -553.5       ],
#       [   0.        ,    0.        ,    0.        ,    1.        ]])
```

### Cropped and aligned image

> * Manual image registration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated image registrations can be prone to be failure if there are very large initial differences between the images. A manual alignment is subjective, but can provide a good enough starting guess that keeps the objective, automated registration more reliable.  
* Manually aligning images
```
I know some would consider this a manual registration, but i think it better to separate what is an relatively objective, automated process from an essentially subjective, manual one.

For manaual image registration in ITK-SNAP go to Tools > image registration
![ITK-SNAP main window](../fig/itk-snap-image-manual-registration.png)

> * Automatic registration (affine)

Reviewer: Is this part of the walkthrough in Jamie's?

Author: There is something similar here https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/image-registration-notes/blob/master/exercises/4-registration/README-ITKSNAP.md#55-cropped-and-aligned-image
